With Neil Armstrong's first step on the moon, America's race with the Russians
had come to an end. That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.
Riding on the coattails of the successful Apollo 11 and 12 moon missions,
America planned to launch its third manned mission to the lunar surface by April
1970.
Unforeseen problems occurred that created a life-and-death situation where the
spacecraft and crew were all but lost.
[Music.]
Hello, I'm Bill Mumy and I portrayed astronaut Will Robinson on TV trying to
get home after being lost in space. The success of NASA's space program was the
combined result of hundreds of thousands of people working toward a single goal,
that of reaching the lunar surface. It was the flight of Apollo 13, more than
any other mission before or since, that brought these components to public
light. This is the true story of the Apollo 13 mission, as told by some of the
unsung heroes who were there and able to cheat death, avoid disaster, bring the
astronauts back home safely, and keep the crew from being lost in space.
The astronauts for Apollo 13 were chosen a year before launch, commanded by the
world's most experienced astronaut James A Lovell Jr. He had already spent
nearly 600 hours in space as a crew member on two Gemini flights and Apollo 8,
the first round trip to the moon. The other two astronauts accompanying Lovell
were both rookies The lunar module pilot was Fred Haise And the command module
pilot was Thomas Ken Mattingly A backup crew trains on the same equipment for
the same mission in the event the prime crew cannot go The commander of the
backup crew was John Young with Charles Duke as the lunar module pilot and Jack
Swigert as the command module pilot.
Few people realize how many hundreds of hours these astronauts and flight
controllers spent in training and simulating mission activities. Every action
and movement during their mission were carefully planned and well thought out,
which were the real secrets to the successes of the Apollo program. The
simulations that we ran were very high fidelity, they were very much like a real
flight, you know, sitting in the control center, we couldn't tell the difference
between whether it was a simulation or a real flight, it looked exactly the
same. In the simulation people could throw faults into the system and they'd
test us to see if we handled them correctly. Thousands of problems and failures
had been considered, documented, and simulated throughout the history of the
space program. These training sessions formed the basis of the rules each
mission followed. Mission rules were all written to give you time to deal with
issues that you didn't realise were going to happen, and not very many times did
anything happen that we didn't have a pre-planned operation for. Sometimes they
were disparate, or sometimes not directly associated with each other as they had
happened in the simulation but the flight controllers at that point in time in
Apollo were very well trained I believe to handle most anything that could
happen. We tried to cover at best what we thought were all the thousands of
credible failures that could happen both the spacecraft and the mission. There
were some always some people offline including myself but in some key people
that worked for me that And they would sit around at night and dream up worst
case contingencies and what ifs and draw out solutions on the back of a napkin,
kind of an arrangement, that weren't subjected to formal training. So there was
always a lot of, what if this really does happen. The crewmen tried to play it
out as close as possible to what was really happening. That is they played it
like it was real. Even the far out cases where it was almost too difficult to
survive, they played them all the way through. That doesn't mean we didn't crash
on the moon sometime. It was not our intention to practice for disaster. I mean
you don't need to do that But we would give them situations and in any of these
situations you might do the wrong thing the first time You know and then you go
back and think about what you would do and then change your response and Get
better at it Singulation people would hit us with the failure and we'd handle it
They hit us with another and hit us and they would just finally they load us up
so heavy that they knew They could finally break us if they just kept working at
it and so we had some good natured of ribbing quite often between us where we
would say, Look, get realistic. You know, all those failures aren't going to
happen. In the process of training, we crashed many times into the medium. Other
times we'd get very nervous about what was happening with the guidance system,
and we'd abort unnecessarily to the point where we really started losing
confidence in our own ability as controllers, our ability as a team. The
simulation team has to be able to defend their selection of a failure. That's
about the only thing they have to answer for. They can be merciless in their
scripting, they do it in real time. They take great delight and they're really
good. They are just superb and as a result we all learned a great deal about how
to deal with the systems and how they work and made our rules better because
we'd try things that Worse than didn't. Lovell, Haise, and Mattingly spent every
minute of every day for over a year in simulators and training for this specific
mission. They were ready and prepared to meet their destiny in space.
Their spacecraft was by far the most complex piece of machinery ever sent into
space. The Saturn V rocket booster had three stages and was over 40 stories
high. Sitting on top of this rocket were the command, service, and lunar
modules. The command module capsule, shown here in deep blue and named Odyssey,
was where the crew were to stay for their journey. The service module, shown
here in silver and red, was where the propulsion system and compressed air were
located. The lunar module that was to take Lovell and Haise to the moon's
surface, named Aquarius, would be held inside the top of the third stage rocket
booster until after launch. Each and every one of the six million parts making
up this spacecraft had to be tested and retested, but the Apollo 13 spacecraft
would be ready to fulfill its task on schedule.
I'd have been on that flight, I'd have started worrying early on. I mean, like,
it was Apollo 13. There had never been a 13 in either the Mercury-Gemini
programs. I mean, it was going to be the first spacecraft that was called 13.
And I can tell you, in the Army, in the military, I mean, like, there's a
superstition about numbers in 13. And Marilyn Lovell says that she was
superstitious about it, you know. I mean, she didn't like the idea of it being
called 13. but Jim Lovell, of course, had no problem with it. I mean, like, he
wanted to go, you know. I mean, he could have cared less what you called it.
Just a month before launch, the Apollo 13 Jinx appeared for the first time
during a test of the spacecraft's two liquid oxygen tanks that supplied the
water, electricity, and breathable oxygen for the spacecraft. The tanks were
supposed to be filled and emptied as a routine check for leaks in the tanks or
lines. We'd had a tanking test on the spacecraft on the ground. And when they
went to detank, they were unable to get one of the oxygen tanks to dump its
load. And they decided to use the heaters in the tank to boil the oxygen off.
And we'd had some fairly lengthy discussions with the engineers about it. I was
convinced that our engineering team had a good story. They understood what they
were doing and procedures were sound and I told Jim he didn't need to worry
about it. Unknown to the engineers or crew, an electrical current overload in
one of the oxygen tanks shorted out the heater switch and fused the circuit
breaker shut. This malfunction was not identified and turned the tank into a
bomb. Only a week before launch, the Apollo 13 jinx appeared again and threw the
entire mission into a turmoil. The problem initially was I was so disappointed
that I'd call all that. I had the measles, you know, a week before the liftoff
and exposed the whole crew to it. Ken hadn't had the measles. And so it was a
big mess just because I had the three-day measles. Sending Mattingly to the moon
with the possibility he might come down with the measles was simply unthinkable
for NASA. Their only choices were to either scrub the mission entirely, an
equally unthinkable prospect, or to replace Mattingly with his backup
counterpart, Jack Swigert. Mixing and matching crews after several months of
training together was never done before, but was the only option left open to
NASA. So only two days before the flight, Mattingly was removed and replaced by
Swigert. This was the only time in the history of the space program that one
Prime crew member was replaced with a backup after they had begun their
training.
Having concentrated seven days a week, 24 hours a day on an event It's suddenly
denied for what you feel is an unreasonable reason, even though intellectually,
you know that it's a sound decision. Emotionally, you feel like you've been
cheated from something important. I don't think from our viewpoint, at least,
that taking TK out of that seat and putting in Swigert was a big impact. We
didn't notice that much difference. The backup crews have trained very much,
like the prime crews, not as much, but obviously they were ready to go. Well, it
was a testimony to our training that they could change out a person in that crew
two days before launch and still the crew could function. The Apollo 11 and 12
moon missions were so successful that the Apollo missions began to take on a
routine nature, creating a sense of complacency in the public and media. When
launch day came for Apollo 13 on April 11, 1970, the launch itself was met with
distinct public apathy and media indifference. I think something like seven
million people showed up to watch the Apollo 11 blast-off. Apollo 12, a few
months later, I think there were two million people showed up, stood on the
beach, watched the blast-off. By the time he got to Apollo 13, it was down to
about 200,000. And the network didn't even cover the telecast.
At exactly 1313 military time in Houston, the Apollo 13 mission began with the
Saturn V rocket lifting the spacecraft toward orbit.
On the way up on the booster, we happened to lose the center engine on the
second stage about two minutes early. It just shut down due to high vibrations.
And for that moment, we thought that this was the crisis of this particular
flight, because most space flights, with the exception perhaps of 8, usually had
something go wrong with them. But we had enough fuel, we had enough power and
enough engine power to get us into Earth orbit and then push us on to the moon.
Once the spacecraft left Earth's orbit, the Command and Service modules
separated from the 3rd Stage Rocket Booster and turned around to dock up with
the Lunar Module. After docking was completed, Springs ejected the Lunar,
Command and Service Modules from the Saturn rocket and the crew flew to the moon
in this arrangement. ... In Apollo 13 as in all flights that I've ever had
anything to do with you always seem to have some malfunctions that take place.
In Apollo 13 there were several but I don't think they were earth shaking or
unexpected standpoint of problems. I'd say particularly on Apollo 13, most
things were pretty routine and had gone reasonably and we were looking forward
to the third landing on the moon. On April 13th, at 54 hours into the flight,
Lovell and Haise were instructed to check out the lunar module and televised their
activities back to Houston. However, none of the networks even bothered to
broadcast it. This is the crew of Apollo 15, guys. Everybody there, a nice
evening and we're just about ready to close out our inspection of Aquarius and
good back for a pleasant evening at Odyssey. Good night. Mission Control noticed
a slight pressure drop in one of the oxygen tanks and instructed Swigert to turn
on the heaters and stir the tank up. Unknown to the crew at the time, an
electrical short circuit sparked a fire in the oxygen tank's protective
covering, causing the tank to explode with such force that it blew a huge panel
off the service module. The explosion also ruptured the backup oxygen tank.
We've got a problem here.
Say that again, please?
Houston, we've had a problem. And I heard a hissed bang. The spacecraft rocked
back and forth. The jet started to fire to stabilize the spacecraft. I looked up
at Fred, and Fred looked down at me, and I knew that Fred didn't know what
caused his bang. Then I looked over at our third companion, Jack Swigert. He was
over there in the left seat, and his eyes were as wide as saucer. Our life
support console and its operator noticed that we're beginning to see the
pressure decrease in oxygen in the service module and for a time period we went
through the normal steps to try to figure out what that situation might be. was
it some problem with instrumentation, even though the crew had definitely heard
something occur? And more importantly, is it something where the procedures we
had could isolate that problem? And we started seeing so many signatures. There
were all kinds of strange electrical signatures, things in the fuel cells and
all over where it didn't match any of the kinds of symptoms that we had been
trained to look for. And we felt that we really had run into another one of the
bizarre instrumentation phases. Looking at the instruments that told me the
condition of two huge liquid oxygen tanks that we had way back in the service
module, on the quantity gauge of one, it read zero. And on the quantity gauge of
the other, I could see the needle slowly go down. Okay, Houston, I'm John. I
tried to reset that fuel cell 1 and 3, both showing gray flags, but they're both
showing zip on the flows. Arnie Aldrich called me. And the question and the
dialogue was kind of like this between Arnie and I. He says, John, there's been
some kind of an anomaly here and the guys in the Mission Control Team were
chasing it because it seems to be a bunch of unrelated things. it must be some
kind of problem with the data relay of all the measurements from the spacecraft.
Initially, no one at mission control could believe that there was a complete
structural failure of the spacecraft, a situation that was never even simulated
before. It's so I asked him, I said, what are you reading some parameters? So I
asked him to call up some ECON displays and he read me some parameters and I
said well read me some more and I said no that's not, that's not an incantation
failure. It may be missing more and I remember summarizing to him at the end of
that conversation, Arnie, I don't know what problem you're chasing out there but
it's a real problem, it's not an incantation problem. That problem is real. You
have a real problem. Obviously I'll be right there. I went past Jack, looked out
the side window and I could see escaping at a high rate of speed a gaseous
substance from the rear end of my spacecraft and very shortly we'd be completely
out of oxygen and we'd be completely out of electrical power and when that
occurred because we gimbled our maneuvering engine by means of electricity we
would lose our propulsion system what started out as a routine milk run to the
moon was now turning out to be the single greatest test of NASA's creative
ability to solve complex problems on a real-time scale to bring the crew back
alive. The mission was lost, and these astronauts were in a broken down
spacecraft, almost 200,000 miles from Earth, going in the wrong direction, and
had no idea how or if they were going to come home. On the night of April 13th,
I had just come into the control center maybe half hour ahead of time. And I was
getting ready to go on shift. My team was going on to the shift takeover from
Gene's team, Gene Kranz's team. We needed time to think, we needed time to
establish a plan. We needed time to figure out what was going wrong, what had
gone wrong, and then we needed time to figure out what we were going to do about
it. Basically, the first activity we had was to buy time. I think most of the
team operated with confidence that we were going to be able to pull it off, if
it was salvageable at all. I would have to say that probably each one of us in
our own heart of hearts, at some point during the events after the blow up and
before we got stabilized, probably had a little bit of a sinking feeling as to
how this thing was going to turn out. Some people at Mission Control wanted the
spacecraft to turn around and return to Earth immediately. But Kranz and Lonnie
argued that they couldn't depend on the spacecraft's propulsion system and
needed to build a rescue plan in the simulators. I think there was a period in
there when, I think very few people had any idea how we would pull this off. But
I think the kind of training that we had, and the simulations, and the kind of
people we work with, that even though you don't know what the outcome is, um,
you know you probably don't have many opportunities to make mistakes.
I was home sick with the measles when the the tanks blew
up. Then I got a call from somebody at Mission Control saying, hey we got a real
problem here this thing, uh, we're, we lost and losing all our oxygen, uh, can
you come in. So I got up, and John and we all went to mission control and ended
up in mission control, all the backup crew. And for the first 10 or 12 hours, in
my memory, as I recall it, it looked grim, and we weren't going to make it.
Nobody ever anticipated that they were going to have a problem of this
magnitude. I mean, they had never simulated that many system failures. I mean,
the electrical system totally failed. The oxygen system totally failed. I mean,
those kind of things weren't supposed to happen. They had two oxygen tanks
because if either one of them broke, the other one would work. I mean, they only
needed one of those tanks to make the whole trip. But they carried two just to
be safe, and suddenly they lost both of them. I mean, like, nobody thought that
was ever possible. To where it didn't look good. With only 15 minutes of
electricity left in the command module, Mission Control had to accept the fact
that the command and service modules were dying and would have to be shut down
completely. There was never any plans or even procedures to totally turn it
completely off, dead, in orbit or to activate it from a dead state in orbit.
That was not a set of procedures that we either had or thought we needed. So the
whole technical aspects of doing that in an early process, power down and power
up, and of course then the emotional aspects of I've got to turn it off,
the very module that takes you there and gets you there. Because it was a
philosophical hurdle as well as a technical hurdle in this room. With the
command module as good as dead, mission control decided that their only option
was to move the crew into the lunar module. We had caused on the flight before
13, the crew to have to use the LM of the lifeboat, the lunar module, as a
lifeboat. And it was a massive electrical failure that we'd given them, you
know, and that caused the event to occur. And it worked quite well. And
everybody took a look at those lifeboat procedures and was kind of prepared in a
mental sense. Put them back in the corner, never thinking that we'd ever really
have to do anything like that. So we started thinking in terms of using a LM
lifeboat, not knowing where that's going to take you next, because you can't
come home... In the course of the evening, you know, I guess one way
to think of ourselves is we were a little bit of a, almost a mash hospital in a
sense in that we had to stabilize the situation and shut the command module down
as gracefully as we could and get the crew moved over and powered up in the
lunar module and then do a lot of things with it that we had not planned for or
trained for and all that time not make any bad mistakes that would compromise
how things might turn out at the end of the mission. objetient. The lunar module
was small, cramped, and designed for only two crew members to spend about 20
hours on the surface of the Moon and didn't even have any chairs. Now, it would
be called on to support all three crew members for at least the four or five day
flight back to Earth. We formed a team in the back room that kind of got into
Coca-Cola and sat down and said, and okay, now we've been through that traumatic
experience, now what do we do, we've got to figure out how to get home. Or if we
can get home, how to get through the entry sequence. When you, when we started
sampling out everybody's technique or what they needed to get home, I was doing
some mental arithmetic in my head, and I said, guys we can't do it like that. We
don't have anywhere near the kind of power of an entry matter to do this
anywhere close to a normal sequence. Everyone at Mission Control, including the
flight crew, did some mental calculations of what power and consumables remained
in the spacecraft and came to the conclusion that the crew would be lost. Fred
Haise on the back of an old envelope was going back and forth and saying, you
know, Jim, we don't have enough electrical power to get home. So the conclusion
was either we weren't going to make it or we're going to do this in such a
different way, in a way we never thought of before. That was the only two
possibilities. And so I approached it from the standpoint was not so much that
Given It Was Impossible, because that was unthinkable to talk about. So I, we
basically as a team back then did, well, Given It's Impossible, let's not work
that way. Let's talk about it. What would it take to make it possible? And so a
team was formed under Gene Kranz with all of the dynamics people, the trajectory
people, or the Lunar Module people and the Apollo Command and Service Module
people to get together now and see what does this mean to our mission. What Gene
did was to put John in the position of, you're the guy that's got to come up
with a final plan, working with all the people. But John didn't work out the
plan by himself. He had a lot of people. He was the guy that became the power
guru or the power czar to make sure that we played it right for the rest of the
mission. In the hopes of stabilizing the water and power resources, everything
in the lunar module was shut down, even the heaters and guidance controls. All
that could be left on was a small light, a fan, and a radio for contact with
mission control. It was clear that this problem was going to require the
combined efforts of every simulator engineer, systems analyst, backup astronaut,
and computer technician. They were all called into the NASA centers in the
middle of the night of April 13th. You know, they were worried if they were
going to keep the life support systems going long enough to get them back. And
it was pretty shaky. They didn't know if the heat shield was going to work. I
mean, after all, there had been this huge explosion. And it could have damaged
the heat shield easily. And there's no way to test it. You don't know until you
actually do re-entry if it's going to work. Since all of the systems of the
spacecraft would have to be pushed beyond the outer limits of their
specifications, all of the contractors were also contacted for their expert
opinions on what could be done to help rescue the crew. while most of america
slept control rooms around the country hosted crews of bleary eyed technicians
working on computers slide rules and simulators to come to a solution to this
crisis
people in bethpage in new york that built the linear module swung into action
many of the people that supported them by building components that went into
that. Other contractors swung into action. Hamilton Standard, the suit
manufacturer and some of the ECS controls. All of that swung into action. On the
Command Module side, built by Rockwell in California, the same thing happened.
They swung into action. They had test facilities. They had simulation
capabilities that were unique, test chambers and so forth. All of that got
turned on. It was a team effort very across the country. The first immediate
challenge facing mission control was to change the trajectory of the spacecraft
using the lunar module engines. In the case of Apollo 13, because of the landing
site and the lighting conditions that were desired, we actually diverted from
the free return trajectory—that is, free return to the earth after swinging
around the moon—and we were on a trajectory which, had we not done any more
burns, would never have returned anywhere near the vicinity of the earth. And we
knew that we had to perform some kind of a propulsion maneuver with one of the
rocket systems in order to correct the trajectory and get ourselves swinging
around the moon, but then coming back towards the Earth approximately in an
entry corridor.
After this burn put the spacecraft on the correct flight path, debates
immediately began to rage in mission control. The directors and management split
into two separate factions on just how quickly to bring the crew home. One group
wanted to jettison the useless service module to lighten the spacecraft and burn
the lunar module's engine at maximum as it rounded the far side of the moon,
bringing the spacecraft back to Earth as soon as possible. The other group
argued if the service module was jettisoned, the command module's heat shield
would be exposed to at least four days of the ultimate cold of space. They
pushed to leave the service module attached and take a more conservative but
longer return to Earth. We had managers who listened to the technical inputs of
the members of the team, and myself and Lonnie and a couple of the other flight
directors. Said, hey the way to do it is to take the long road home because we
have the confidence we can stretch the LM. And again, what we have to do is we
have to establish a strategy for coming home. We don't want to force ourselves
into decisions early in the game. We've got this LM spacecraft. We've learned
how to use it as a lifeboat. We ought to continue to use it out of lifeboat.
We've got the ability to buy time. The burn we decided on was to, as we passed
the moon's closest point of approach, we call that parascythian two hours later
we decided to do a burn and so we decided to take the easier or the more
conservative approach and get them back get them back where we had a carrier and
get them back at 142 hours. About 6 hours after the initial explosion the final
details for the parascythian burn were being worked out by the backup astronauts
in simulators and were ready to be radioed up to Lovell. They came up and said,
are you ready to copy? The procedure I think will work. And I said, fine. My two
companions were next to me. They started reading the procedures, and I started
copying down everything, and I looked at my companions, and they weren't
listening. They said, well, Jim, as we round the back side of the moon, the far
side, we're going to take pictures. I said, if we don't get home, you won't get
them developed. News News of Apollo 13's problems broke like waves of shock and
disbelief around the world in the morning of April 14. At the moment the
astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their trouble. The late reports as
the spacecraft now is operating on battery power alone. All unnecessary
equipment is being turned off. The media was now in a feeding frenzy about this
mission and the danger that the crew faced. many nations offered their support
and facilities to the rescue mission. We had the Russians, we were right in the
middle of the Cold War and the Russians came in and they offered the services of
any ships they had to help us out. I mean, I can get misty about that time and
place because it was just a getting together to save somebody and that's what it
was about.
The crew now faced another crisis. Their exhaled breath was creating a buildup
of carbon dioxide. A chemical in canisters normally filtered out the carbon
dioxide, but the system in the lunar module was becoming dangerously
overburdened. The command module had several large square canisters, but the
lunar module had only two small round ones. When the command module was shut
down, its circulation system also shut down. The three astronauts would be dead
of carbon dioxide poisoning at least a day before they could return to Earth
without something being done to filter out the carbon dioxide in the capsule.
When they came up with we're running out of CO2 is building up and what are we
going to do A couple of us said well that's easy we did that on a sim for I
think probably Apollo 8 where we found we could use the vacuum cleaner and blow
air through the lithium hydroxide canister and we wrapped it with plastic and
ray tape and says yeah and they'd call up somebody and say hey do you remember
how we did that Then someone would remember who was on console during that sim
and go get them, and they go off and say, Now you guys go figure out how to do
this, and write that down as a procedure. Joe Kerwin was one of the astronauts
at the time, and Joe was working with the people in the chambers as to how we
could best configure something like, configure a solution to that problem. Joe
worked it all night, and then Joe was one of the guys who came in and radioed up
the instructions to the crew on how to configure the system so that we would
indeed continue to be able to use the scrubbers or the filters that didn't fit
in the holes in the lunar module. We worked solid for 35 hours and the more we
worked the better it began to look and so I think within the first 24 hours
about the time they were arriving at the moon i had a piece in my heart that we
were going to make it unless some other major catastrophe happened we were going
to make it once the crew swung around the moon and headed back towards the earth
the oxygen supply appeared to be under control but it still did not look like
there would be enough electricity and water to make it back home Astronauts and
simulator engineers were working non-stop on procedures required for the crew's
safe return. We worked very closely with the backup crew and the people who were
running the simulators as part of this process, because once we started
sketching out what we could afford for Stand-Up Power, we started describing
that, interacting with them. The backup astronauts brought their own ideas and
techniques back into the procedures, negotiations. We only had so much lifetime
of the batteries, so we started turning things off, powering down the lunar
module even, to lengthen the time the batteries would last so that the crew
could last until they got back home. And that became very difficult, because
what we weren't sure of was just how cold it would get in the lunar module as we
kept shutting things down. So again, it triggered another set of analyses You
know, people weren't just in the simulator playing these situations about what
switches... What else can we turn off? How can we save a few watts here and
there? But other people were back at the desks just analyzing reams of data
about the real spacecraft. How much was this lamp worth? You know, how many
watts did it burn? While the ground crews were working on the re-entry
procedures, things got to be so cold in the lunar module that it was now a
matter of survival just to be able to exist there for the trip back home. The
place was like the inside of a refrigerator. And for them to sustain that for as
many days as they did, I think, was a real test of their physical stamina. I'm
not sure how much presence they could have gone in those kind of temperatures. I
think Fred got pretty ill and shivering. It had to be miserable. The crew, of
course, we had them in a situation that was very uncomfortable. It was cold, it
was damp. They were very short on water. It was a much higher priority to run
the water boards that cooled the spacecraft than it was for drinking water. And
we tried to the best of our ability to make it as comfortable as we could for
them. But, in reality, flight crew knew and we knew the subsystem got the first
priority on water and power and temperature. I had a number of debates with the
engineers in the mission evaluation room about how cold certain subsystems would
get and, if they would get so cold, they would freeze and, therefore, cause a
problem with the command module for entry. And so we struck a fine balance
between projected temperature profiles for systems and power levels we could
allow things to continue to run at. Back on Earth, the reaction to the plight of
Apollo 13 was worldwide and enormous. The creative genius that NASA was famous
for was under the microscope of public scrutiny. It seemed as though everyone on
the planet was united in prayer for the safe return of these three brave
astronauts. Lord, your astronauts will come back safe. In the darkness and cold
of space, Lovell, Haise, and Swigert still had some doubts as to whether or not
they could really be rescued, and were preparing themselves for the worst case
scenario. When you're in a tight spot and there's really nothing to do and
everything is quiet, that's bad news. You start to think. And I think it was
Swigert that said, you know, we might be exceeding escape velocity. If we miss
the atmosphere coming back in, we'll of course escape from the Earth and, you
know, that means going into an orbit about the sun. I said, well, fine. Jim
Lovell admitted one time that he thought, well, because there was a real chance
that they were going to miss the Earth, You know, that they were going to
literally be marooned in space. And Lovell told himself that if that happened,
he was going to just stay on the radio and broadcast as long as he could, you
know, and just send word back. You know, I mean, and that's a pilot's attitude.
They were pilots, you know. I mean, so Lovell was glad that at least he was
going to be at the control. You know, he'd be flying his ship, whatever
happened.
Even with all of the efforts to conserve electricity and return home faster, the
spacecraft was still going to run out of critical resources just before it
reached the point of re-entry and the mission and crew would be lost.
So our flight controllers took a very ingenious way to flow power backwards from
the lunar module to charge. We had a battery charger on the board of the command
and service module. Of course, with the fuel cells gone and the oxygen tank
gone, there was no way to power the battery charger. But they came up with an
ingenious way to manipulate hundreds of circuit breakers. We should have kept
that checklist of back-flow power from the lunar module to the command module.
That complicated maneuver put another 10 to 15 percent of electricity back into
the command module batteries and gave the crew barely enough power needed to
initiate the re-entry procedures. Sixteen hours before re-entry, the crew went
back into the command module to prepare for their final procedures. The capsule
was so cold that the windows and gauges were covered with frost. The water
supply was already gone. The crew were exhausted and hoping that their
spacecraft would hold together for just a few more hours.
Because the command module was still connected to the service and lunar modules,
the single most complex maneuver of this mission was first to separate from the
service module, then separate from the lunar module, and reenter the atmosphere
in such a way as to not run into either one of them on the way down.
The folks planning for the entry portion of the mission had a variety of new things to consider.
Plus, they were also restrained by the limited amount of electrical power we had in the three entry battery
So everything that they did had to be constrained to how much power we would really have there and
how far we could stretch those batteries... As we got closer to re-entry, John and I
began to get concerned about powering up the, were we giving them enough
time to power up the command module? And was the maneuvers that Jim Lovell had
to do in the lunar module to get them in the right attitude was, did we have
that figured out right? We finally ended up with a complete set of procedures
which we then sent over to the simulator and gave it to a cold crew, because it
wouldn't do any good for me to go run the procedure since I had essentially put
it together. I would do it right anyhow without the language being correct. So
we gave it to a cold crew that had not had anything to do with it in hopes of
catching any ambiguous phrasing or things that would be difficult. We got
concerned about that. So we ran into the simulator. And sure enough, I mean, if
we were gonna come within 10 degrees of that critical maneuver. So we talked
flight control into abandoning that maneuver, and let's just stand with a safe
attitude, and when we separate, then we will reorient and get things done, and
that's what we did. The astronauts on the ground were invaluable, in this
period, they were very knowledgeable about exactly what was happening upstairs,
but they also were enabled to do that because of the great simulation
capability, which I think will forever be one of the unsung major, major reasons
we had the successes that we did. Even when things worked right, they were
invaluable. But when things went wrong, they were really just absolutely
necessary. The crew jettisoned the service module first, then tried to swing
around to get a look at the damage caused by the oxygen tank explosion. And
there's one all side of that thing in this one. Is that right? Just before
reentry into the Earth's upper atmosphere, the lunar module was jettisoned.
Okay, copy that. Farewell, Aquarius. Thank you. I think we felt reasonably
comfortable that once we got the command module separated from all this excess
hardware now that it was going to work okay. Because we had checked those
systems out, and we had brought the systems back online. We had had all the
systems working about an hour before we got ready to do that separation work.
And I think we were reasonably satisfied it was going to work okay. Everyone
realized, however, that there could have been damage to the heat shield,
parachutes, or any of a dozen other potential problems resulting in the loss of
the capsule and crew. All those things were on our mind, but not very high level
in the sense that for the most part there are things we couldn't do anything
about. They were of what we would call a hand-wringing type, and if we couldn't
do anything about them and we couldn't figure out any way if there weren't any
defenses against their implications, we generally walked past it and said, well,
if it is, so be it, if it's not, we'll be okay. When the heat shield of a
spacecraft traveling 20,000 miles per hour first comes into contact with the
upper atmosphere, it becomes red hot from the friction. The superheated air
around the capsule creates a radio blackout for several minutes. Based on prior
missions, the blackout time had been calculated down to the second. In the case
of Apollo 13, I mean, they were supposed to be, and say it's three minutes and
10 seconds in blackout. And so they're watching the clock and it gets down to
three minutes and 10 seconds and they wait to hear from them. They don't hear
anything. I mean, oh God, did the parachutes work? Because they'd been frozen
out there in outer space all this time. Maybe the parachutes didn't work. Maybe
the heat shield didn't work. All these things that maybe didn't work. And it's
three minutes and 30 seconds and three minutes and 40 seconds. I think it went
past four minutes. You could have heard of 10 drop. I mean, it was just quiet as
it could be. Only the CAPCOM, every once in a while, I call him, Apollo 13, this
is Houston. Apollo 13 is Houston, do you read? Finally, about four, about four
and a half minutes, total blackout. I think it was Jack. It may have been Jim,
but it may have been Jack. Hello, Houston, this is 13, how do you read? Almost
casually.
The report that a RIA-4 aircraft has acquisition of signal. The re-entry was
clearly the most widely watched worldwide event in the history of television,
and everyone certainly expressed a simultaneous sigh of relief, then cheer as
they saw the parachutes come out and drop the capsule into the ocean. We opened
the doors of this room, and these hundreds of people would come into the room,
all of whom had one little piece of this mission, but without whom we couldn't
have done this mission. There was just a feeling of togetherness, of bond,
unity, accomplishment. It was just the most marvelous feelings in my entire life
existed in this room. Perhaps the most important aspects of this particular
mission were the overall implications of this rescue. I think a real tribute to
the way NASA does business, not one thing that we did had to be invented from
scratch. I'm convinced that virtually everything that we did had been done in a
simulation somewhere, some time prior to that mission. The only thing we did was
to package them in a different order. I think the great thing about Apollo 13 is
that it really shows that it's not all about technology. You know, I mean, like
even when all the gadgets fail, these people can still pull it out. You know, I
mean, or they did in that case. I mean, it just shows how, what the level of
ingenuity is. You know, I mean, just the determination of the people involved to
make it work, to rescue their friends. Fundamentally, I mean, these were all
their friends that are out there lost in space. And if they were going to get
them back, they were determined to get them back, they weren't going to accept
no for an answer, and they pulled it off. We went into space as a country in
response to a major challenge. We went there to learn about space. We went there
to learn about ourselves. We went there to explore. We went there to be able to
go out beyond that. In that context, I would view that in terms of opening up
space, in terms of being confident in our ability to do things, Apollo 13 was
really a tremendous success. None of the three crew members of Apollo 13 went
into space again. Jim Lovell had already promised his wife that this was to have
been his last mission. Jack Swigert went into politics and was elected as a
congressman but died of cancer before taking office. Fred Haise went on to do
development work on the space shuttle, but retired before its first flight. T.K.
Mattingly, who was replaced for this mission, eventually did go to the moon on
Apollo 16, along with John Young and Charles Duke. Mattingly was also the
commander of two space shuttle missions, becoming a veteran astronaut himself.
Perhaps the Apollo 13 mission showed the world beyond any shadow of a doubt just
how much could be accomplished accomplished when the success of a mission was
the only thing that mattered. Where thousands of people contributed anonymously
towards achieving that single goal and taking pride in the team effort without
any self-serving attention given to any one individual. No matter what the
challenge, mankind has the ability to rise to the occasion.
[Music.]